R4R:  Subkeys Spec Proposal (#3930)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/spec/auth/subkeys_proposal.md

> # Subkeys ADR

Reviewer: Maybe we should use ADRs in the SDK! I don't think it matters much what we call the documents - but discussing in depth with a written spec prior to implementation seems helpful.

> # Subkeys ADR

Reviewer 2: If this is an ADR (not a spec), then it should adhere to the ADR template (which I added ages ago and has since been removed I think).

## Abstract

> Currently, a `StdAccount` has only one public key assoiciated with it, and all transactions that are made with that key must be signed by that one public key. This is problematic because the security level required by different types of transactions executable by an account may be different. For example, an account may want to keep the key that has the ability to do `SendMsg`s in cold storage, but wants to keep a key that can vote on governance proposals on their phone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, a `StdAccount` has only one public key assoiciated with it, and all transactions that are made with that key must be signed by that one public key. This is problematic because the security level required by different types of transactions executable by an account may be different. For example, a user may want to keep the key that has the ability to send their funds in cold storage, but keep a key that can vote on governance proposals on their phone.
```

> For this reason, we introduce the concept of SubKeys.  Accounts should be able to have multiple public keys, each of which can have different permissions.  The main public key of account can provision new subkeys with specific msg routes who they are allowed to sign for.  If a subkey tries to sign a tx with a msg type it is not permitted to use, the tx will be rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason, we introduce the concept of SubKeys.  With this proposal, accounts will be able to have multiple public keys, each of which can have different permissions.  The main public key of an account can provision new subkeys with specific msg routes which the subkey is allowed to sign for.  If a subkey tries to sign a tx with a msg type it is not permitted to use, the tx will be rejected.
```

> One complexity in this system is that all txs, regardless of their msg type, need to be able to tx fees. This means that even your lowest security subkey, if compromised, could drain your account by using your entire balance as the tx fee for a transaction. To resolve this, we add a notion of FeeAllowances.  The master pubkey along with provisioning subkeys with msg types they are allowed to use, also provisions them with a daily allowance of tokens that they are allowed to spend to pay transaction fees.  For example, if SubKey A has a daily fee allowance of 1atom, it can spend up to 1atom on transaction fees in a 24 hour window.  If it does not use its atom in a 24 hour window, their "allowance" does not accumulate, it still stays at 1atom in any 24 hour window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One complexity in this system is that all txs, regardless of their msg type, need to be able to send tx fees. This means that even your lowest security subkey, if compromised, could drain your account by using your entire balance as the tx fee for a transaction. To resolve this, we add a notion of FeeAllowances.  The master pubkey, along with provisioning subkeys with msg types they are allowed to use, also provisions them with a daily allowance of tokens that they are allowed to spend to pay transaction fees.  For example, if SubKey A has a daily fee allowance of 1atom, it can spend up to 1atom on transaction fees in a 24 hour window.  If it does not use its atom in a 24 hour window, the "allowance" does not accumulate, it still stays at 1atom in any 24 hour window.
```

> One complexity in this system is that all txs, regardless of their msg type, need to be able to send tx fees. This means that even your lowest security subkey, if compromised, could drain your account by using your entire balance as the tx fee for a transaction. To resolve this, we add a notion of FeeAllowances.  The master pubkey, along with provisioning subkeys with msg types they are allowed to use, also provisions them with a daily allowance of tokens that they are allowed to spend to pay transaction fees.  For example, if SubKey A has a daily fee allowance of 1atom, it can spend up to 1atom on transaction fees in a 24 hour window.  If it does not use its atom in a 24 hour window, the "allowance" does not accumulate, it still stays at 1atom in any 24 hour window.

Reviewer 2: The average user will not care about or use subkeys. In such a case, is there an ability to support unlimited `FeeAllowances`? If not, then we should be able to. Maybe the master key has such an ability.

Author: The master key has unlimited FeeAllowances

Reviewer 3: what's the storage complexity for storing this window info?  we don't want to have another issue similar to the signed blocks window bloat.

## Construction

> To begin, we add define the struct that stores the metadata about a certain account.  This includes the pubkey itself, the routes it's permitted to sign transactions for, it's daily allowance, and how much of its allowance its used in the last 24 hour window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin, we define the struct that stores the metadata about a certain account.  This includes the pubkey itself, the routes it's permitted to sign transactions for, its daily allowance, and how much of its allowance has been used in the last 24 hour window.
```

```golang
type SubKeyMetadata struct {
  PubKey               sdk.AccPubKey

>   PermissionedRoutes   []string

Reviewer: `map[string]bool` ?

Needs to be a set.

Reviewer: Also I wonder if these should be treated as prefixes

Author: Amino doesn't support maps rn.

So just using a slice where inclusion is true, and noninclusion is false.

Reviewer: A wrapper type would be cool, but OK.

  DailyFeeAllowance    sdk.Coins

>   DailyFeeUsed         sdk.Coins

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
It seems this field is not required here due to usage of the `DailyFeeSpend` struct below

Author: No, this field is to keep track of the sum of all outstanding `DailyFeeSpend`s from a specific SubKey.

Reviewer 4: aha makes sense

}
```

We create a new `Account` type called `SubKeyAccount` that stores a list of `SubKeyMetadata`s.

```golang
type SubKeyAccount struct {
  Address       AccAddress
  Coins         Coins

>   PubKey        sdk.AccPubKey

Reviewer 4: this is effectively the master key correct? we should mention this somewhere

Author: Yes, added.

  AccountNumber uint64
  Sequence      uint64
  SubKeys       []SubKeyMetadata
}
```

In the `StdSignature` type we need to add a new field called `PubKeyIndex` which tells the anteHandler which SubKey to use to verify this signature.

```golang
// StdSignature represents a sig
type StdSignature struct {

> 	crypto.PubKey                  `json:"pub_key"` // optional

Reviewer: Indentation seems off

  Signature     []byte           `json:"signature"`

>   PubKeyIndex   uint

Reviewer 4: this struct contains a mixture of fields with and without `json` tags, I'd recommend removing the tags altogether from this document

Author: Ok

}
```

> If a `StdSignature.PubKeyIndex` is 0, this means that the account's "master" PubKey should be used to verify the signature.  If the `StdSignature.PubKeyIndex` is `> 0`, it verifies the signature using the corresponding **1-indexed** SubKey in the SubKeyAccount.SubKeys slice.  Note, the SubKeys slice is 1-indexed rather than 0-indexed because the 0 index is used to refer to the master PubKey.  See pseudocode below:

Reviewer 4: could you explain the thinking behind using the masterkey for signing the first message, what is being solved by doing this? (we should probably add this explanation into the doc here too)

Author: Sorry, I don't know what you mean by "using the masterkey for signing the first message"?

Reviewer 4: the term `because the 0 index is used to refer to the master PubKey` led me to create this statement - maybe the term `PubKey` index should be clarified a bit

```
if stdSig.PubKeyIndex == 0 {
  verify stdSig using acc.PubKey
} else {
  verify stdSig using acc.SubKeys[stdSig.PubKeyIndex - 1]
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: I don't find this pseudocode to be useful, I think the written explanation above is sufficient, If you wanted things to be slightly clearer, I'd just have bullet points in the above paragraph instead of this pseudocode. Ex;
 - if stdSig.PubKeyIndex == 0, verify stdSig using acc.PubKey
 - otherwise verify stdSig using acc.SubKeys[stdSig.PubKeyIndex - 1]

> In the AnteHandler, if a transaction comes from a SubKey, it verifies the msg route is permitted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the AnteHandler, if a transaction comes from a SubKey, it verifies the msg route it permitted.
```
is this what you meant?

```

> if msg.Route not in subKeyMetadata.PermissionedRoutes {

Reviewer 2: There is no notion of messages in the ante handler. It only performs tx-level basic checks.

Author: Yeah, we'd need to have the AnteHandler inspect the msgs.  I think that means we have to pass the baseapp amino codec (where the msgs are declared) to the ante handler (if it's not already).

  return ErrNotPermitted
}
```

When a transaction signed by a SubKey is accepted and has paid fees, we need to log the fees it has paid.  We increase the `SubKeyMetadata.DailyFeeUsed` field.

> If a new transaction from a subkey comes in and the `tx.Fee + subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeUsed > subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeAllowance`, then the transaction is rejected as it the subkey is trying to exceed it's daily fee allowance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a new transaction from a subkey comes in and the `tx.Fee + subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeUsed > subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeAllowance`, then the transaction is rejected as the subkey is trying to exceed its daily fee allowance.
```

But now we need a way to decrease the `DailyFeeUsed` field once transactions are past the 24 hour window.  To do this we us a time based iterator similar to the ones used in the governance and staking queues.

We start by defining a new struct called a `DailyFeeSpend`, which is what will be inserted into the Queue.

```golang
type DailyFeeSpend struct {
  Address              sdk.AccAddress
  SubKeyIndex          uint
  FeeSpent             sdk.Coins
}
```

> When a transaction using a SubKey has paid its fee, into this queue's store we insert a new entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a transaction using a SubKey has paid its fee, we insert a new entry into this queue's store.
```

Yoda are you?

> When a transaction using a SubKey has paid its fee, we insert a new entry into this queue's store.

Reviewer 2: What kind overhead will this be adding? Both space and time.

Author: It would add a constant time operation for each transaction that uses a SubKey.

It will also add a constant size state insertion, but this only lasts 24 hrs, and then is pruned from state.

> - The key is `sdk.FormatTimeBytes(ctx.BlockTime.Add(time.Day * 1)`

Reviewer 2: Why multiply by 1?

Author: Idk, just to show that it was _1_ day lol.  In case people don't remember the multiplicative identity property 😛

- The value is the Amino marshalled `DailyFeeSpend`

> Finally in the EndBlocker we iterate over the all the DailyFeeSpends in the queue which are expired (more than a day old).  We prune them from state, and deduct their FeeSpent amount from the corresponding SubKeyMetadata.

Reviewer 4: Let me just confirm this idea - the queue is organized such that if nothing is expired, the queue will only need to check the top record of the queue each endblock to confirm this correct?

Author: Yep.  The keys are the `sdk.SortableTimeFormat` bytes, and so the EndBlocker just asks for an iterator from `nil` to `sdk.FormatTimeBytes(ctx.BlockHeader().Time)`.  If there's nothing that is expired, the iterator will just come back empty, and it will go on.  Won't have to even do any Amino unmarshals.

Reviewer 4: nice, thanks

```
store := ctx.Store(spentFeeQueueStoreKey)
iterator := sdk.Iterator(nil, sdk.FormatTimeBytes(ctx.BlockTime)) // pseudocode abstract this as a slice of DailyFeeSpend

for _, dailyFeeSpend := range iterator {
  acc := accountKeeper.GetAccount(dailyFeeSpend.Address)
  acc.SubKeys[dailyFeeSpend.SubKeyIndex - 1].DailyFeeUsed -= dailyFeeSpend.FeeSpent
  store.Delete(dailyFeeSpend)
}
```

## Msgs

In order to add, revoke, and update SubKeys, we would need to add some new `Msg` types to the auth module.

We start by defining an `MsgAddSubKey` struct:

```golang
type MsgAddSubKey struct {
  Address              sdk.AccAddress
  PubKey               sdk.AccPubKey
  PermissionedRoutes   []string
  DailyFeeAllowance    sdk.Coins
}
```

> The handler of this Msg will create a new SubKeyMetadata struct using the data from this Msg, and append it to the end of the SubKeys slice of the Account associated with the Address.

Reviewer 2: It should be noted that only a master key can add a new subkey, right?

Author: Technically, you can give any subkey access to the `MsgAddSubKey` route, but then you're essentially just giving it master control as well.  You should probably avoid doing that, but I don't think we should restrict it because there might be some use case I'm not thinking of yet.

```
acc := accountKeeper.GetAccount(msg.Address)

acc.SubKeys := append(acc.SubKeys, SubKeyMetadata{
  PubKey               msg.PubKey
  PermissionedRoutes   msg.PermissionedRoutes
  DailyFeeAllowance    msg.DailyFeeAllowance
  DailyFeeUsed         sdk.Coins{}
})

accountKeeper.SetAccount(acc)
```

To make it easier to reason about the security of a SubKey, we do not allow you to add or remove permissions from a SubKey. If you want a SubKey with new permissions, you should create a new SubKey.  We do however allow you to update the allowance of a specific subkey. This can be useful because minimum transaction fee costs may fluctuate over time.

To update a SubKey, we create a new `MsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance`

```golang

> type MsgMsgUpdateSubKeyAllowanceAddSubKey struct {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type MsgMsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance struct {
```

  Address              sdk.AccAddress
  SubKeyIndex          uint
  DailyFeeAllowance    sdk.Coins
}
```

The handler of this message will update the SubKey at the index of `SubKeyIndex` in the account for `Address`.

```
if SubKeyIndex == 0 {
  return Err
}

acc := accountKeeper.GetAccount(msg.Address)

acc.SubKeys[msg.SubKeyIndex - 1].DailyFeeAllowance = msg.DailyFeeAllowance

accountKeeper.SetAccount(acc)
```

> We do not allow for the deletion of a SubKey, because removing it from state would mess up the indexing of subkeys. Instead, if you wish to revoke a SubKey, set its DailyFeeAllowance to 0.

Reviewer 5: This resembles a bit how GPG keys are revoked, i.e. keys/subkeys are never deleted, a revocation certificate is attached to them instead.

> We do not allow for the deletion of a SubKey, because removing it from state would mess up the indexing of subkeys. Instead, if you wish to revoke a SubKey, set its DailyFeeAllowance to 0.

Reviewer: I don't know if this really works, because proposers can just accept zero-fee transactions. I think we need a stronger revocation that prevents any future signed transactions by the subkey.

Author: You're right.  Forgot MinFees aren't enforced in consensus.  Will fix.

## Construction

To begin, we define the struct that stores the metadata about a certain account.  This includes the pubkey itself, the routes it's permitted to sign transactions for, its daily allowance, and how much of its allowance has been used in the last 24 hour window.

```golang
type SubKeyMetadata struct {
  PubKey               sdk.AccPubKey
  PermissionedRoutes   []string
  DailyFeeAllowance    sdk.Coins
  DailyFeeUsed         sdk.Coins
  Revoked              bool
}
```

> We create a new `Account` type called `SubKeyAccount` that stores a list of `SubKeyMetadata`s.

Author: Yeah, but that should be checked based on Account/Address.  SubKeys are really only used in the antehandler for checking that signatures are okay.  Past that, accounts work as normal (so follow vesting rules if they are VestingAccounts)

  PubKey        crypto.PubKey
  Signature     []byte
  PubKeyIndex   uint
}
```

If a `StdSignature.PubKeyIndex` is 0, this means that the account's "master" PubKey (the `SubKeyAccount.PubKey`) should be used to verify the signature.  If the `StdSignature.PubKeyIndex` is `> 0`, it verifies the signature using the corresponding **1-indexed** SubKey in the `SubKeyAccount.SubKeys` slice.  Note, the SubKeys slice is 1-indexed rather than 0-indexed because the 0 index is used to refer to the master PubKey.  See pseudocode below:

```
if stdSig.PubKeyIndex == 0 {
  verify stdSig using acc.PubKey
} else {
  verify stdSig using acc.SubKeys[stdSig.PubKeyIndex - 1]
}
```

In the AnteHandler, if a transaction comes from a SubKey, it verifies that the SubKey has not been revoked and it is permitted to use the msg routes it is trying to sign over.

```
if acc.SubKeys[stdSig.PubKeyIndex - 1].Revoked {
  return ErrNotPermitted
}
if msg.Route not in subKeyMetadata.PermissionedRoutes {
  return ErrNotPermitted
}
```

When a transaction signed by a SubKey is accepted and has paid fees, we need to log the fees it has paid.  We increase the `SubKeyMetadata.DailyFeeUsed` field.

> If a new transaction from a subkey comes in and the `tx.Fee + subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeUsed > subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeAllowance`, then the transaction is rejected as the subkey is trying to exceed its daily fee allowance.

Reviewer 6: what I mean here is that _if_ we support messages that only involve fees (without amounts), then we should add a check on the `PermissionedRoutes`.

Otherwise we should add both `DailyAmountAllowance` and `DailyAmountUsed` (or merge it with the `DailyFeeAllowance`/`DailyFeeUsed`)

> If a new transaction from a subkey comes in and the `tx.Fee + subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeUsed > subKeyMetadata.DailyFeeAllowance`, then the transaction is rejected as the subkey is trying to exceed its daily fee allowance.

Author: Yeah, I think a DailyAmountAllowance is really good idea, so that you can limit SubKeys to only spending a certain amount.  However, I think is a more complex thing, because you "spends" can happen in many different ways across different modules (bank sends, gov deposit, etc).

Nice thing about checking just DailyFeeAllowance is it is only checked in one spot in the ante handler, and that's it, doesn't affect any other module.

I think DailyFeeAllowances is a good starting spot.  We can do the more general AccountAllowance in the future; I think it needs a more complex feature called "SubAccounts".

But now we need a way to decrease the `DailyFeeUsed` field once transactions are past the 24 hour window.  To do this we us a time based iterator similar to the ones used in the governance and staking queues.

We start by defining a new struct called a `DailyFeeSpend`, which is what will be inserted into the Queue.

```golang
type DailyFeeSpend struct {
  Address              sdk.AccAddress
  SubKeyIndex          uint
  FeeSpent             sdk.Coins
}
```

When a transaction using a SubKey has paid its fee, we insert a new entry into this queue's store.
- The key is `sdk.FormatTimeBytes(ctx.BlockTime.Add(time.Day * 1)`
- The value is the Amino marshalled `DailyFeeSpend`

Finally in the EndBlocker we iterate over the all the DailyFeeSpends in the queue which are expired (more than a day old).  We prune them from state, and deduct their FeeSpent amount from the corresponding SubKeyMetadata.

```
store := ctx.Store(spentFeeQueueStoreKey)
iterator := sdk.Iterator(nil, sdk.FormatTimeBytes(ctx.BlockTime)) // pseudocode abstract this as a slice of DailyFeeSpend

> for _, dailyFeeSpend := range iterator {

Reviewer 6: ditto for `DailyAmountAllowance`

  acc := accountKeeper.GetAccount(dailyFeeSpend.Address)
  acc.SubKeys[dailyFeeSpend.SubKeyIndex - 1].DailyFeeUsed -= dailyFeeSpend.FeeSpent
  store.Delete(dailyFeeSpend)
}
```

## Msgs

> In order to add, revoke, and update SubKeys, we would need to add some new `Msg` types to the auth module.

Reviewer 6: shouldn't we add a message to also update the `PermissionedRoutes` of a `SubKey` ?

Reviewer 6: maybe merge it with `MsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance` to just have a `MsgUpdateSubKey` for better UX. I personally wouldn't like to submit 2 transactions to update the routes and the allowance

Author: You can just create a new subkey with the same `crypto.PubKey`.

We start by defining an `MsgAddSubKey` struct:

```golang
type MsgAddSubKey struct {
  Address              sdk.AccAddress
  PubKey               sdk.AccPubKey
  PermissionedRoutes   []string

>   DailyFeeAllowance    sdk.Coins

Reviewer 6: ditot

}
```

The handler of this Msg will create a new SubKeyMetadata struct using the data from this Msg, and append it to the end of the SubKeys slice of the Account associated with the Address.

```
acc := accountKeeper.GetAccount(msg.Address)

acc.SubKeys := append(acc.SubKeys, SubKeyMetadata{
  PubKey               msg.PubKey
  PermissionedRoutes   msg.PermissionedRoutes
  DailyFeeAllowance    msg.DailyFeeAllowance
  DailyFeeUsed         sdk.Coins{}
  Revoked              false
})

accountKeeper.SetAccount(acc)
```

To make it easier to reason about the security of a SubKey, we do not allow you to add or remove permissions from a SubKey. If you want a SubKey with new permissions, you should create a new SubKey.  We do however allow you to update the allowance of a specific subkey. This can be useful because minimum transaction fee costs may fluctuate over time.

To update a SubKey, we create a new `MsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance`

```golang

> type MsgMsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance struct {

Reviewer 6: see comment above regarding the `DailyAmountAllowance `

> type MsgMsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance struct {

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
type MsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance struct {
```

  Address              sdk.AccAddress
  SubKeyIndex          uint
  DailyFeeAllowance    sdk.Coins
}
```

The handler of this message will update the SubKey at the index of `SubKeyIndex` in the account for `Address`.

```
if SubKeyIndex == 0 {
  return Err
}

acc := accountKeeper.GetAccount(msg.Address)

acc.SubKeys[msg.SubKeyIndex - 1].DailyFeeAllowance = msg.DailyFeeAllowance

accountKeeper.SetAccount(acc)
```

Finally, to revoke SubKeys, we add a `MsgRevokeSubKey`

> ```golang

Reviewer 6: also this needs to be ```go

> type MsgMsgUpdateSubKeyAllowance struct {

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
type MsgRevokeSubKey struct {
```

  Address              sdk.AccAddress
  SubKeyIndex          uint
}
```

The handler of this message will revoke the SubKey at the index of `SubKeyIndex` in the account for `Address`.

```
if SubKeyIndex == 0 {
  return Err
}

acc := accountKeeper.GetAccount(msg.Address)

acc.SubKeys[msg.SubKeyIndex - 1].Revoked = true

accountKeeper.SetAccount(acc)
```

> We do not delete the SubKey from state, because removing it from state would mess up the indexing of subkeys.

Reviewer 6: thanks for clarifying this 👍
